Every spring, the eastern monarch butterfly begins a migration that rivals that of some birds and whales.
How does such a delicate insect make such a long trip?
Monarchs are strong, efficient flyers, thanks to their wingshape and the way they flap them.
They may also glide on air currents for an extra boost.
In spring, millions of monarch butterflies leave Central Mexico.
They fly northeast for several hundred miles, where they reach the end of their lifespan.
Amazingly, the end of their life doesn't mean the end of the journey.
Before they die, they lay eggs.
The next generation hatches, matures, and keeps flying north, again and again.
Until up to four generations later, when the great and great, great grandchildren of the original monarchs occupy their summer home, mostly throughout the northeastern United States.
They perform this multi-generational relay with no training, no map, and a brain no larger than the head of a pin.
Amazingly, one thing they do have is a solar compass.
It tells them what direction to fly relative to the sun, even when it's behind clouds.
A clock in their antennae adjusts their heading as the sun moves across the sky.
Monarchs also have an annual clock that tells them when to begin their journey back to Mexico, before the weather turns too cold.
But the trip home is not so easy.
They'll need more than efficient flying and good navigation to succeed, because this generation will fly the entire journey back, stretching over almost 3,000 miles.
The monarchs prepare for their journey in an unexpected way.
They stop producing eggs temporarily and instead build muscle and store fat.
They grow larger, can fly almost 10 times as far and live up to 8 times as long.
They're a butterfly, super-generation.
Their compass heading flips from north to south, and off they go.
In about two months, they arrive back to their point of origin in Mexico.
They place neither they nor their parents, grandparents, nor perhaps even their great-grandparents have ever seen.
Researchers hope that a better understanding of the monarch butterfly will help create efficient, long-range micro-air vehicles.
What do you think?
Did the monarch butterflies ability to migrate long distances evolve or was it designed?